Machine Learning Technologies
Generalisation
Validation

Donny Hurley

ATU Galway

Donny Hurley Generalisation 1 / 46



Generalisation

Generalisation is the goal of ML

Want good performance for new data

How good the generalisation is, is how well it performs on previously “unseen
data” i.e. data not used to train the set.

Definition
Generalisation is the model’s ability to give sensible outputs to sets of input that it has
never seen before. √

Root-mean-squared (RMS) error could be used to measure: ERMS = 2E (w∗)/N

Back to previous idea of checking how far away pred is away from the original y, what
is the problem?
We are checking the Generalisation of the model by using data it was trained on, i.e. it
is NOT previously unseen.
Our model may be overfit to the training data.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 2 / 46



Overfitting

So you chose a model, and did your training and reduced the training loss to 0.
Great right???

No!

This is the same as a student learning off the answers at that back of the book.

They may still do well in the exam but if they are given different questions,
they’re in trouble.

They have not generalised their learning, they have memorised specific examples.

In Machine Learning this is called Over-fitting to the data.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 3 / 46



Underfitting

The opposite problem is under-fitting.

You can’t even seem to reduce your training loss to anything reasonable.

This is like the student not being smart enough to do the exercises.

In machine learning this is generally a symptom of not having a complex enough
model (Student not smart enough).

Students not being smart enough is unlikely in the real world, as each of us is
given a complex model to work with (The Brain).

Other causes of under-fitting in machine learning are poor training mechanisms or
an inappropriate loss function.

This is more like the student who sits in the library all day long - looking at social
media and can’t figure out why they still can’t do the examples.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 4 / 46



Underfit/overfit

Definition
Underfitting occurs when a statistical model or machine learning algorithm cannot
capture the underlying trend of the data.

Intuitively, underfitting occurs when the model or the algorithm does not fit the data
well enough. Underfitting is often a result of an excessively simple model.

Definition
Overfitting occurs when a statistical model or machine learning algorithm captures the
noise of the data. Intuitively, overfitting occurs when the model or the algorithm fits
the training data too well.

Overfitting is often a result of an excessively complicated model.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 5 / 46



Training, Validation, and Test Sets

Training set: used to fit model parameters.

Validation set: used during model development for hyperparameter tuning and
model selection.

Test set: used once at the end to estimate generalisation performance.

Using the test set during model tuning or selection leads to optimistic and misleading
performance estimates.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 6 / 46



Dataset Splits (Diagram)

Training Validation Test

Donny Hurley Generalisation 7 / 46



Building model

It does not matter what type of models we are building the process is similar.

Have a set of data.

Pick base form of models to use.
Train the data on those models

If you are trying to choose precisely which model to use - this is where to do it
Even if you are comparing different model types (Regression vs NN vs Random
Forest etc.) this is the stage to make the decisions. (Using a validation set!)

Test the final chosen model.

Note: no matter how good the model, almost always the more datapoints the better.
(The more tuples of x, y the better, having too many independent variables/features
can cause issues.)

Donny Hurley Generalisation 8 / 46



Building a model

We have a set of data, that is a pair of information. We know the correct answer for
the set.

X is the set of all inputs (a matrix).

y is the set of all corresponding response variables.

A particular y (i) is the result for a particular x(i).

1 from s k l e a r n . l i n e a r mo d e l impor t L i n e a rR e g r e s s i o n
2

3 l r = L i n e a rR e g r e s s i o n ( )
4 l r . f i t (X, y )
5 pred = l r . p r e d i c t (X)

Donny Hurley Generalisation 9 / 46



Testing the performance of the model

1 l r . f i t (X, y )
2 pred = l r . p r e d i c t (X)

In the code, we have created a model called lr.

lr was trained on the set of known information.

Recall from regression, the predicted values are not exactly the same as what is
inputted

So pred is not the exact same as y but they hopefully are close.

So we could test performance by checking how far away pred is away from the
original y

Does anyone see a problem with this?

Donny Hurley Generalisation 10 / 46



So how do we actually test our model

We use a test set of data, that we know the answers.
It does not matter if the response variable is a number (regression) or a quality
(category/classifier), it’s a similar idea.

We may use different formulae to determine accuracy and performance.

Our test set is kept separate from the training set.
When it is used to check performance of the model, it is brand new information to the
model. (while we still know the correct answers)

1 l r . f i t ( X t r a i n , y t r a i n )
2 pred = l r . p r e d i c t ( X t e s t )
3 #Compare pred wi th y t e s t

Compare pred with the known results for the test set and it will give allow us to check
performance.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 11 / 46



Test Sets

Sometimes when trying to solve a problem using you are given an explicit Training Set
and a separate Test Set.

The Training set is used to fit the model (learn the parameters).

The Test set is used to Evaluate the model (check its performance/generalisation).

This is fine and you use them that way. However, often you are just given one set of
data and it’s your job to decide the best method to fit and train with the large set of
data.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 12 / 46



Test Set

This is very very important

The Test Set is Only For the Final Eval-
uation at the end after you have made
all your decisions

If the Test Set is used for any decision
making, it is now contaminated

Even if it seems your lecturer is using
the test set in lectures/lab books, it is
still wrong to use it to make any choices
in model selection.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 13 / 46



Test Set

Some Important Notes About the Test Set

You need to guard the test set carefully, from yourself, and use it only sparingly.

The Test set should be kept apart and almost never used.
It must not be used in trying to choose any hyper-parameter (polynomial, I’m
coming to this) for a model

If it was used in selection, it would no longer be unseen data.
It should never be used when trying decide between say a SVM or a Random
Forest model

As again, it would no longer be unseen data when making a choice.

Use it only for overall evaluation.

ML testing competitions keep the test set hidden and private.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 14 / 46



Train/test Split

Let’s say we start with a big set of data that we have collected. This is a sample of
size m.

For each item i in the data we know the x(i) vector (features/independent
variables)

We also know the equivalent y (i) response.
We split the data into two sets, a training set and a test set

Almost always the training set is going to be significantly larger than the test set.
80/20, 75/25 are often good splits.
Randomly select which items are in the training set and which are in the test set.
Very Important.

Fit the model on the training set.

Evaluate the model on the test set.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 15 / 46



Train/test Split

1 from s k l e a r n . mo d e l s e l e c t i o n impor t t r a i n t e s t s p l i t

is a method built into sklearn to split a dataset into training and test sets randomly.

1 X t r a i n , X te s t , y t r a i n , y t e s t = t r a i n t e s t s p l i t (X, y , t e s t s i z e
=0.25)

will make a test size of 25% of the data (which is the default anyway)

1 X t r a i n , X te s t , y t r a i n , y t e s t = t r a i n t e s t s p l i t (X, y , t r a i n s i z e
=0.8)

can specify it that way too if you prefer.

The return values will be numpy arrays.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 16 / 46



Full model procedure

Donny Hurley Generalisation 17 / 46



Deciding the complexity of the model

When dealing with relatively simple models, (that take only minutes-hours to
train), then you can afford to try many different model sizes.

But you can’t just pick the one that gets the lowest training error, we’ve already
shown that can lead us wrong.

Instead we need a mechanism to check our loss on data that the training
algorithm doesn’t see.

The technique we will be looking at is called Hyper-parameter tuning.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 18 / 46



Hyper Parameters

Definition
Hyper-parameters are parameters that are chosen rather than learned.

Examples of Hyper-parameters are:

the degree of your model, e.g. linear, quadratic, n-degree polynomial.

Which features to use in your model? (Is every bit of information needed?)

The Learning rate α

Amount of Regularisation

The number of layers/neurons in a Neural Network

Donny Hurley Generalisation 19 / 46



Polynomial Curve Fitting

What form is y(x)?
Try polynomials of degree M.

y(x ,w) = w0 + w1x + w2x
2 + . . .+ wMxM

This is the hypothesis space.
Note w is a vector (that’s why bold). w = (w0,w1, . . . ,wM)

How do we measure success?
Sum of squared errors

N
1 ∑

E (w) = [y(xn,w)− tn]
2

2
n=1

or RMS

Among functions in the class, choose that which minimises this error.

The degree of polynomial is a hyperparameter.
We really want the degree that captures the trend of the data best.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 20 / 46



Which degree of Polynomial?

The green line is the ”ideal” model, the red line is the shape of the model built.

If M = 9 then E (w∗) = 0: This is over-fitting

Donny Hurley Generalisation 21 / 46



Polynomial regression – overfitting vs underfitting
One of the biggest problems is either overfitting the model or underfitting the model

Overfitting means the model is too sensitive to the variables you used to ”train”
the model
Underfitting means the opposite, two few terms.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 22 / 46



Better picture

Be aware of these possibilities when creating a regression model

Donny Hurley Generalisation 23 / 46



RMS

y(x ,w) = w0 + w1x + w2x
2 + . . .+ wMxM

Here is the root-mean-squared for each M
1 Seeing the performance of the training set vs the model (known information)
2 Seeing the performance of the test set vs the model (previously unseen)

The point is, the model performs very very well at M = 9 for the training set. It
performs very very poorly at M = 9 for the test set. i.e. it is overfit at M = 9.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 24 / 46



Selecting the HyperParameter

So we need to have some method of selecting the hyperparameters.

Note: There can be many different methods for selecting hyperparameters that can be
quite complicated. In this level 8 course, I will only demonstrate one real method. I
will take shortcuts a little. In the future, if you go into this area, you will have more
learning to do.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 25 / 46



Validation Set

Keeping the Test Data separate:

Split training data into training set and validation set (70/30 split is often used)

Train different models (e.g. diff. order polynomials) on training set
Iterate through all possible hyper-parameters (e.g. polynomial M=1, then M=2,
then M=3)

1 Fix the hyperparameter (M=1 to start)
2 Train a model using the training set
3 Validate the model using the validation set
4 Store the result for that hyperparameter
5 Repeat from step 1 with the next hyperparameter

Choose model (e.g. order of polynomial) with minimum error on validation set

(not always done but often) Retrain the model on the complete training data
(training set + validation set).

Donny Hurley Generalisation 26 / 46



Test Error/loss

Now we need to be a little careful here.

Hyperparameters are parameters of the model that are not trained, i.e. we choose
them.

As we can see though with hyper-parameter tuning, we are not exactly training
them but we are not choosing them either.

The tuning that takes place is in some way using the validation set data.

It may not see the data directly but it is getting a signal from it.

In effect the validation data is compromised.

It doesn’t give us a true picture of the generalisation of the algorithm.

For this we need a test set so that we can calculate a test error, that is only used
after we have chosen our final model.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 27 / 46



Getting a Validation Set

If we have a lot of data, we can go with the above and just use a static validation set
to choose our model. train test split can be used a second time here’s an example:

1 X t r a i n , X te s t , y t r a i n , y t e s t = t r a i n t e s t s p l i t (X, y , t e s t s i z e
=0.2)

2

3 X t r a i n , X va l , y t r a i n , y v a l = t r a i n t e s t s p l i t ( X t r a i n , y t r a i n ,
t e s t s i z e =0.1)

4

5 # Or cou ld do X t ra in sm , X va l , y t r a i n sm , y v a l = t r a i n t e s t s p l i t (
X t r a i n , y t r a i n , t e s t s i z e =0.1)

At each step train the model using X train

Validate each hyperparameter using X val

Make the choice based off that

Retrain the model using both X train and X val together

Evaluate the model using X test

Donny Hurley Generalisation 28 / 46



Validation vs Testing

You choose your model using validation (even comparing different algorithm types, use
validation).

You can evaluate your final model with the test set.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 29 / 46



Cross-validation

Using a static Validation Set can introduce Bias. What if the validation set is not
representative? If we have limited data this is more likely to occur.

The idea of Cross-Validation is to do multiple runs at validation

Cross-validation creates S groups of data, use S − 1 to train, other to validate

Do a number of runs with these different groups (depending on Cross-Validation
method chosen)

Average over all the scores for the different training/validation splits

Choose the hyperparameter that has the lowest average over all runs

There are many types of cross-validation as time is limited, here’s one

Donny Hurley Generalisation 30 / 46



k-fold Cross Validation

Randomly split your entire dataset into k”folds”

For each k-fold in your dataset, build your model on k – 1 folds of the dataset.
Then, evaluate the model to check the effectiveness for kth fold

Record the error you see on each of the predictions

Repeat this until each of the k-folds has served as the validation set

The average of your k recorded errors is called the cross-validation error and will
serve as your performance metric for the model

(5 and 10 are usually often good choices for the number of folds - the default in
sklearn is 5)

Note
This is not feasible for more complicated models like Deep Learning, for those you have
to just use a static validation set.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 31 / 46



10-fold Cross Validation

Donny Hurley Generalisation 32 / 46



Final procedure yet?
Keeping the Test Data separate:

Iterate through all possible hyper-parameters (e.g. polynomial M=1, then M=2,
then M=3)

1 Fix the hyperparameter (M=1 to start)
2 Randomly split the training data in k-folds

1 Train a model using k − 1 folds of the dataset.
2 Evaluate the model using the remaining fold.
3 Record the error.
4 Repeat until all folds have been a validation set.

3 Take the average error of all folds and store that result for the particular
hyperparameter

4 Repeat from step 1 with the next hyperparameter
Choose model (e.g. order of polynomial) with minimum (average) error on the
folds
(not always done but often) Retrain the model on the complete training data
(training set + validation set).

You choose your model using validation, you can evaluate your final model with the
test set.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 33 / 46



A procedure

1 Split your labelled/known results into training set and test set
2 Select your base model (linear regression, nearest neighbours etc.)
3 Tune the hyper-parameters of the model using Cross Validation
4 Train the model (with chosen parameters) with the training set
5 Compare the different types of models using some form of validation - make final

decision.
6 Evaluate the final model using the test set

Donny Hurley Generalisation 34 / 46



Multiple Hyperparameters

It is clear to see that if you have multiple hyper-parameters, it is difficult to
choose the optimum for each as you have to hold all other hyper-parameters
steady while you test one of them.

What value do you hold them steady at?

Well you have to try with every combination. (GridSearchCV can help with this
and we’ll see it later)

When dealing with large data sets that take weeks to train you can see that this
becomes in-feasible.

With small data sets in can be difficult to split into train-val-test and still have
enough training data.

There is no perfect solution.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 35 / 46



Bias/variance

Whenever we discuss model prediction, it’s important to understand prediction errors.
There is a tradeoff between a model’s ability to minimise bias and variance.

Definition
Bias is the difference between the average prediction of our model and the correct
value which we are trying to predict. Model with high bias pays very little attention to
the training data and oversimplifies the model. It always leads to high error on training
and test data.

Definition
Variance is the variability of model prediction for a given data point or a value which
tells us spread of our data. Model with high variance pays a lot of attention to training
data and does not generalise on the data which it hasn’t seen before. As a result, such
models perform very well on training data but have high error rates on test data.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 36 / 46



Bias–Variance Trade-off (Diagram)

Error

Variance

Bias
Model Complexity

Donny Hurley Generalisation 37 / 46



Overfit/underfit
Overfitting is the case where the overall cost is really small, but the generalisation of
the model is unreliable. This is due to the model learning ”too much” from the
training data set. (low bias, high variance)

Underfitting is the case where the model has ”not learned enough” from the training
data, resulting in low generalisation and unreliable predictions. (high bias, low variance)

Bias-variance trade-off. What is the right measure?
Depending on the model at hand, a performance that lies between overfitting and
underfitting is more desirable.
This trade-off is the most integral aspect of Machine Learning model training.
Machine Learning models fulfil their purpose when they generalise well.
Generalisation is bound by the two undesirable outcomes — high bias and high
variance.
Detecting whether the model suffers from either one is the sole responsibility of
the model developer.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 38 / 46



Confidence

One of the major problems with over-fitting is that it does not just mis-classify
new data but it can often do so with very high confidence.

When the model is of more modest complexity it may have certain samples in the
training set that end up on the wrong side of the decision boundary
(classification) or are a long way from the model (regression).

However the model can report this.

The model can say, I predict this but I am only x% sure (classification) or there is
x-tolerance with this prediction (regression).

Donny Hurley Generalisation 39 / 46



Seeing Overfitting/underfitting

Often people compare the score for the training set vs the score for the validation set
to see if either of these are happening

1 l r . f i t ( X t r a i n , y t r a i n )
2

3 t r a i n s c o r e = l r . s c o r e ( X t r a i n , y t r a i n )
4 v a l s c o r e = l r . s c o r e ( X va l , y v a l )

If the training score is very poor, then the model is underfit

Almost always the training score will be better than the validation score.

If there is a large difference between training score and validation score (training
score much better), than the model is overfit

Donny Hurley Generalisation 40 / 46



Dealing with over/underfitting

It is a constant issue but there are some common techniques

For under-fitting you either need to train for longer or use a more complex model. It
may also require you to look at your training mechanisms and loss function. Are they
appropriate to the problem?

For over-fitting you could:

Make the model less complex.

Decrease the number of features. Particularly if there is a large number of
features compared to the number of training samples. But you are also throwing
away information with this method. Choose wisely what to throw out.

Get more data.

Often use regularisation (later we’ll talk about this).

Donny Hurley Generalisation 41 / 46



Regularisation

Another term that applies in general to “most” Machine Learning systems is the idea
of Regularisation.

Definition
Regularisation is a technique used for tuning the function by adding an additional
penalty term in the error function. The additional term controls the excessively
fluctuating function such that the coefficients don’t take extreme values.

This technique of keeping a check or reducing the value of error coefficients are called
shrinkage methods or weight decay in case of neural networks.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 42 / 46



Regularisation

Some Points:

Regularisation is a more general way of avoiding overfitting.

It works be adding a term to the loss function which adds loss if the model is not
of a preferred type.

In particular we don’t want the weights to become very large.

A large weight can change by a large amount very quickly.

As differences in the magnitude of weights can quickly spiral out of control and
individual weights influence can quickly exceed their importance.

For this reason we add a penalty to the loss function that is related to the size of
the weights.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 43 / 46



Mean Squared Error

m
1 ∑

MSE (w) = (y (i) − fw(x
(i)))2

2m
i=1

It can happen that when “optimising” this Loss function, some of the weights
may become very large.

That means the feature corresponding to these large weights will “increase” in
their importance

This can cause overfitting.

So what can we do with these large weights?

Donny Hurley Generalisation 44 / 46



Mean Squared Error - l2 (Ridge Regression)
We add a regularisation term (λ) to our Loss funct∑ion that penalises large weights

n

L(w) = MSE (w) + λ w2
j

j=1

This means that if any particular wj is large, the overall Loss will be large too.
This is known as the L2 norm. (squared magnitude)
It does not matter if we are using MSE or any other loss function, we add on the
regularisation term to the end.
Here is the MSE with regularisation fully written out

m
1 ∑ ∑n

L(w) = (y (i) − fw(x
(i)))2 + λ w2

2m j
i=1 j=1

(some places may write this slightly differently), where n is the number of features and
m is sample size. Notice we do not include the bias term (w0)

Donny Hurley Generalisation 45 / 46



L2 Regularisation (Regularization)

The effect of regularisation is to make it so the model prefers to learn small weights,
all other things being equal.

Large weights will only be allowed if they considerably improve the first part of the cost
function.

The relative importance of the two elements of the compromise depends on the value
of λ:

when λ is small we prefer to minimize the original cost function

when λ is large we prefer small weights.

Large λ moves in the direction of underfitting, and small λ moves in the direction of
overfitting.

So it is another hyperparameter that we have to choose - perhaps via cross-validation.
Additionally Gradient Descent applies just as it does without regularisation, it just has
an extra term when calculating the updates/gradients.

Donny Hurley Generalisation 46 / 46