Machine Learning Technologies
Week 1 Introduction

Donny Hurley

Donny Hurley Intro 1 / 55



What is Machine Learning (ML)?

Algorithms that automatically improve performance through experience

Often this means define a model by hand, and use data to fit its parameters

There are problems that are difficult for humans but easy for computers

E.g. calculating large arithmetic problems

And there are problems easy for humans but difficult for computers

E.g. recognising a picture of a person from the side

Machine Learning often tries to leverage the things computers are good at (large
arithmetic and repetitive problems) to solve things that we are usually able to do more
easily.

Donny Hurley Intro 2 / 55



Why ML?

The real world is complex – difficult to hand-craft solutions.

Think about how many ”if” statements would be needed!
ML is the preferred framework for applications in many fields:

Computer Vision
Natural Language Processing
Speech Recognition
Robotics
. . .

Humans can typically parse sentences but computers do not get the context.
Humans are not consistent with grammar etc but computers expect consistency.

Donny Hurley Intro 3 / 55



Book

There are absolutely loads
of books on machine
learning

Donny Hurley Intro 4 / 55



Course Syllabus - Subject to Change...

General ML stuff:

Supervised and Unsupervised Algorithms

Classification

Regression
Generalisation

Underfit/Overfit
Bias/Variance
Training/Test sets
Error/Loss Functions

Cross-Validation

Gradient Descent

Regularisation

Donny Hurley Intro 5 / 55



Models/Algorithms:

Naive Bayes

K-Nearest Neighbour

Support Vector Machines

Neural Networks

Principle Component Analysis

Applications:

Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Basic not LLMs!)

Image Recognition

Some other things

Donny Hurley Intro 6 / 55



Assessment

Three components for assessment:

Either an in-class lab exam or project about shallow AI around week 7 (30%)

A project about Convolutional Neural Networks due at end of semester (30%)

An Exam (40%) during exam time

Donny Hurley Intro 7 / 55



Basic idea of all machine learning

Machine Learning is using an algorithm that can learn from Data.

We want to create a Model that takes input and gives output. It is basically

y = f (x)

We figure out the right-hand side of the equation by gathering a lot of data and
making the parameters best fit our base model.

Donny Hurley Intro 8 / 55



Basic Example
Take a base model of y = w0 + w1x , we need the figure out the ”best” w0 and w1
parameters e.g.

Of course our base model can be much more complicated, have many more parameters
that need to be learnt, but the basic idea is the same.

After we have made the model, we can then make predictions in the future. Above,
how many daily minutes do we predict a person with 30 friends on the platform?

Donny Hurley Intro 9 / 55



Why does it take so long?

In the above example, one parameter, a basic line as the model, learning all the
parameters is very very quick. But real world is not that quick.

Some ML models can takes hours, days, weeks or even months to be trained.
ChatGPT (some version of it anyway!) is actually 8 different models, with 220 billion
parameters in each. This takes a very long time to figure out.

Donny Hurley Intro 10 / 55



Why does it take so long?

The training is repeatedly doing the
same procedure over and over and over
and over again, until we get the
parameters we think are best.

Donny Hurley Intro 11 / 55



Gathering Data

Most of the data we want, needs to be labelled. This means, any data we put into the
system is a pair of information

y , x

where y is the right answer for that and x is the collection of all features

So let’s say we have a collection of images that are cats or dogs and we want to build
a model that can separate them.

For a particular image there is a correct y , i.e. y is cat or dog and then x is all the
features of the image i.e. each x will be the colour of a pixel.

Donny Hurley Intro 12 / 55



Dataset example

We (the human intelligence) must do a
lot of work here.
We need lots of training data and labels
associated with them.
Example: MNIST Data set.
To learn to recognise handwritten let-
ters the algorithm must be trained on
60,000 samples, each of which must be
labelled correctly - by hand.

Samples of data set, from wikimedia.

Donny Hurley Intro 13 / 55



Hand-written Digit Recognition

Now let’s look at some potential applications and how we could try ”phrasing” the
problem.

Difficult to hand-craft rules about digits.
Donny Hurley Intro 14 / 55



Hand-written Digit Recognition

xi = , yi = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)

So the image can be represented by the value of each pixel. Each pixel colour is called
a feature, they are independent variables..

Represent input image as a vector xi = R784

Suppose we have a target vector ti
This is supervised learning
Discrete, finite label set: a classification problem.

Given a training set {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN)}, the learning problem is to construct a
”good” function y(x) from these.

y : R784 → R10

Some algorithms will not exactly return (0, 0, 0, 1, . . . etc. but may return probabilities
like (0.01, 0.03, 0.04, , 0.01, 0.88 . . . so the image is most likely a 4.

Donny Hurley Intro 15 / 55



Face Detection

Classification problem.
ti ∈ {0, 1, 2}, non-face, frontal face, profile face.

Of course this can be expanded into the face of a particular person so the possible ti
set could be large. ti is the set of ALL possible results.

We map/transform the image to a particular ti
Donny Hurley Intro 16 / 55



Stock Price Prediction

Problems in which ti is continuous are called regression

E.g. ti is stock price, xi contains company profit, debt, cash flow, gross sales,
number of spam emails sent, . . .

Donny Hurley Intro 17 / 55



Supervised Learning

Techniques where we have training examples where we know the correct result (the y
values). Different types of supervised learning are :

Classification

Regression

Some algorithms :

Linear/Logistic Regression

Naive Bayes

k-Nearest Neighbours

Support Vector Machines

Neural Networks

Decision Trees

Random Forests

Donny Hurley Intro 18 / 55



Clustering Images

Only xi is defined : unsupervised learning

E.g. xi describes image, find groups of similar images

Donny Hurley Intro 19 / 55



Unsupervised Learning

Techniques where there is no ”right” answer known but the algorithm tries to find
some structure/patterns in the data.

Principal Component Analysis (Dimensionality Reduction)

k-mean Clustering

PageRank (Google)

Unsupervised learning techniques will group things together but we do not necessarily
know what the groups are. The images example, after the grouping was done we were
able to say ”This group is pitching, this group is sliding ” etc. But we had no way of
knowing this before it was run and the computer does not have labels for the data
after the algorithm.

Donny Hurley Intro 20 / 55



Other Types

There are other types of Machine Learning, e.g. Reinforcement Learning, but we won’t
be talking about them at all in this course. If you’ve tried using ML-Agents in Unity,
these are an example of Reinforcement Learning.

We won’t be getting as far as Recurrent Neural Networks (often used for time-series
data, sometimes text data) or things like LSTM style models.

Additionally we won’t be doing anything with Transformer models (these are the
breakthrough that made GPTs work and it has been discovered to be very good for
other things too - they are more complex for training and using)

Donny Hurley Intro 21 / 55



Differences

What is the one big problem with supervised learning techniques?

All the training data has to be labelled, often manually, before the model can be built.

Unsupervised learning: It is often easier to obtain unlabeled data - from a lab
instrument or a computer - than labeled data, which can require human intervention.

E.g. Netflix do not have defined groups of people but they group people into clusters
and make recommendations based on the cluster they are in.

Donny Hurley Intro 22 / 55



Types of Machine Learning

Donny Hurley Intro 23 / 55



Machine Learning

Often referred to as narrow AI.

We are only concerned with a specific task.

So the goal of machine learning is not to develop general intelligence or a
universal learning algorithm.

Machine learning seeks an algorithm that learns a particular task well

And should result in a system that probably carries out the task correctly on most
occasions.

Donny Hurley Intro 24 / 55



Machine Learning

Almost every AI thing talk about at the moment are really examples of Machine
Learning (ML) which is a subset of AI.

ML is Narrow AI, it is designed for a specific task. Ask ChatGPT if it is an example of
narrow AI and it says

Yes, as an AI language model developed by OpenAI, I am an example of
narrow AI. I am designed for a specific task, which is generating human-like
text based on the input I receive from users. My capabilities are focused
on natural language understanding and generation, and I am not capable of
general intelligence or tasks outside of my specific domain.

Donny Hurley Intro 25 / 55



AI - Machine Learning - Deep Learning

OpenDataScience
Medium
NewGenApps

Donny Hurley Intro 26 / 55



What is Machine Learning (ML)?

We tell the system how to learn not what to do.

Many of the learning algorithms have been around for decades going right back to
the 1960s.

Neural Networks had beginnings in the 1940s, Deep Learning is building upon
”basic” neural networks.

Rosenblatt (1958) created the perceptron, the building blocks of Neural Networks.

The problem was, they didn’t work very well. Research stagnated as basic
perceptrons were incapable of processing the exclusive-or circuit and that
computers lacked sufficient power to process useful neural networks.

This has been one of the problems with AI in general.

Something new is developed that seems full of promise but then turns out to not
work very well in practice.

So AI goes back into hibernation...

Donny Hurley Intro 27 / 55



AI Winter

Source https://www.actuaries.digital/2018/09/05/history-of-ai-winters/

Donny Hurley Intro 28 / 55



What has changed?

Two major developments have brought all the machine learning algorithms back into
fashion, especially Neural Networks/Deep Learning.

What seemed like insurmountable problems in the past now maybe have solutions
Big Data

The amount of data available now is orders of magnitude larger than the past.
A ”rule” of ML, the more data the better.
Neural Networks/Deep Learning in particular needs a lot of data to work properly.
In the past the issue was trying to get more data, now it is often, how do we process
all this information.

Compute Power
In particular GPUs
People realised the efficiency and power of graphics cards (thanks gamers!) for doing
parallel calculations of maths that ML relies on.
These graphics cards can do matrix (Linear Algebra) operations much more
efficiently than a CPU. (Tensor maths, Tensor cores, Tensor Flow)

Donny Hurley Intro 29 / 55



Timeline

I talked about more historical things on the earlier slides, what have been the big
breakthroughs that led us to where we are now

2012: AlexNet paper and algorithm achieves breakthrough results in image
recognition in the ImageNet benchmark. This popularizes deep neural networks.

Rest of 2010s: Further refinement of classification algorithms and improvements
for the ImageNet benchmarks and others

2017: A team at Google Brain invent the transformer architecture. This is widely
used for Text processing so led to LLMs, but also used by Nvidia for newer DLSS
models.

2020s: GenAI took off this decade.

Donny Hurley Intro 30 / 55



What do we need, to do Machine Learning?

The Task - define or limit the task

The Experience - This is the data, more data = more experience

The Performance measure - We need a good way to measure this.

The Learning Algorithm - The recipe by which we will improve our performance.

The Intelligence - the Network - the brain.

Donny Hurley Intro 31 / 55



What’s in the following image?

How would you instruct a computer to recognise what’s in the image?

The computer doesn’t need to be able to define what a dog is, in order to classify it.

We give it lots of pictures of dogs, telling the computer: these are pictures of dogs. It
is then up to the computer to “decide” how to classify based on the algorithm. What
parts does it pick out as important.

Donny Hurley Intro 32 / 55



Alternatively

Can a computer tell the difference between these two dogs?
The computer doesn’t need to be able to define who each dog is, in order to classify it.
We give it lots of pictures of the dogs, telling the computer: these are pictures of two
different dogs. It is then up to the computer to “decide” how to classify based on the
algorithm.
Again, what parts does it pick out as important.
An ML Model does not need to explain itself, so it may be taking completely different
information than you expect e.g. https://venturebeat.com/business/
when-ai-flags-the-ruler-not-the-tumor-and-other-arguments-for-abolishing-the-black-box-vb-live/

Donny Hurley Intro 33 / 55



Bad AI

https://github.com/daviddao/awful-ai keeps a collection of Awful AI.

Donny Hurley Intro 34 / 55



Machine Learning Technologies
Regression

Donny Hurley

Donny Hurley Regression 35 / 55



Independent/Dependent Variables

Short note on independent and dependent variables

Example
The Value of a House Over Time
Here we have two variables

1 Value of House (V)
2 Time (t)

Since they both change, they are Variables

Value is a Dependent variable, since the value of a house depends on the time you
bought it

Time is independent.

Plotting we typically leave the horizontal axis to repesent the independent variable
and the vertical axis to represent the dependent variable

Donny Hurley Regression 36 / 55



Linear Relationships

If this course, we will mostly look at linear relationships to make our predictions. This
should be revision on the next couple of slides!

Definition
A Linear relationship: a change in the value of x always produces the same
proportionate change in the value of y .

x 1 2 3 4 5 6
Consider the following table:

y 5 8 14 17 20 44
a What is the value of y when x = 3?
b What value of x will give y = 44?

Donny Hurley Regression 37 / 55



Once we are convinced that some relationship does exist, we can establish the
precise nature of that relationship and use it to predict values of one variable that
would correspond to any given values of the other.
The exactness of the relationship can be seen in the diagram above. The plotted
points lie along an imaginary straight line. If we were to draw a straight line
through them, we could use it for making exact predictions without even
using the formula.

Donny Hurley Regression 38 / 55



Can you come up with a formula for the previous graph???

y = mx + c

y = 3x + 2

for this particular line. We can now use this formula to ”predict” values.
This very very early taught equation of a line is the basis for regression and lots of
machine learning analysis

Donny Hurley Regression 39 / 55



Regression

This is where we try to zone in on a continuous value(s) rather than trying to predict a
class or category.
So, for example if we are trying to predict the distance to a pedestrian, from a vehicle,
this would be a regression problem.

Donny Hurley Regression 40 / 55



Example: How to Cook a Turkey

There is a rule of thumb when cooking a turkey.
Put it in a pre-heated oven for 20 minutes per pound plus 20 minutes.
Where did this idea come from? Is it correct? What could happen if it was wrong?

Donny Hurley Regression 41 / 55



Example: How to Cook a Turkey

This is a linear model which is likely based on linear regression analysis of different
weights of turkeys. The mathematical model is

t = mw + c

where t is the cooking time, w is the weight in pounds, m is the slope of the line and c
is the y -intercept.
Pief Panofsky disagreed and used the following model.

t = w (2/3)/1.5

Let’s analyse this.

Donny Hurley Regression 42 / 55



Example: How to Cook a Turkey

First notice that for the linear model you
have to cook an imaginary turkey for 20
minutes.
Between 1 pound and 6 pounds, the
models are very similar. There is 90
minutes difference between them at 16
pounds.
Which is Safer?
Which tastes better?
Use a meat thermometer.

Donny Hurley Regression 43 / 55



Fitting a linear model

With the above example we see the result of a linear model but not how it was arrived
at.
To do that we have to collect some data, and fit the best line to it.
In the above case this would mean cooking many turkeys of various weights and
cooking them all using some calibrated method, such as a meat thermometer (or an
expert cook with experience).
We collect the ”right” answer and use this to build the model i.e. figure out the
parameters.
Let’s look at some data.

Donny Hurley Regression 44 / 55



Example: How to Cook a Turkey

Given the data to the left, if you had a
nine pound turkey, how long should you
cook it for?
Is this a task for supervised learning or
unsupervised learning?
If we assume a linear model, what are
the parameters that we need to learn?

t = mw + c

Donny Hurley Regression 45 / 55



Example: How to Cook a Turkey

Weight in Pounds 1.1 1.3 1.7 2 2.1 2.3 ...
Time taken to cook 39.4 48.8 55.8 63.0 69.5 67.7 ...

So w is our input variable/feature.
t is our output and can be considered our regression target that we will use to train
the model.
We need to learn m and c .

(We will also use the notation of M for number of training samples M=83 in this case.
(w , t) one) training example.
w (i), t(i) the i-th training example.

Donny Hurley Regression 46 / 55



Notation

You will notice in the previous slides that we used variable names that either match the
problem or that are used regularly in Mathematics.
However, we will not always be dealing with linear models so we are going to use
notation that can be scaled up to larger models.
There isn’t a set notation, so where possible I will use whatever is used in scikit-learn
Therefore we will use w to represent parameters/weights that we are going to train.
We will most often use y as our output and x as input.
So our above equation will now be

y = w0 + w1x

Donny Hurley Regression 47 / 55



Warning on Use of Linear Regression

Linear Regression is based on the assumption that the data points are scattered about
a line. However, often data points are scattered on a curve, example

You can still compute the coefficients (β0 and β1) which will give the line above.
However, we can see it is an inappropriate fit as the line suggests the y-values keep
increasing while the curve shows that they will actually decrease after a point

Criterion for Finding a Regression Line
Before finding a regression line for a set of data points, draw a scatterplot. If the data
points do not appear to be scattered about a line, do not determine a regression line.

Donny Hurley Regression 48 / 55



Others
This was an example of a Simple Linear Regression model. There is only one
independent feature, but of course the real world doesn’t work like that.
There can be polynomial regression

y = w0 + w1x + w2x
2 + . . .wnx

n

Multiple Linear Regression, where instead of x being a single feature it is a vector of
features x = (x1, x2, x3, x4, . . .)

T

y = w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 + w3x3 + . . .

We will look at those in some detail later, but keep in mind the weights (w ’s) are still
linear in both instances. We can also write the weights as a vector

w = (w0,w1,w2,w3,w4, . . .)
T

What you know about Simple Linear Regression can be expanded to the other cases.
Donny Hurley Regression 49 / 55



Errors
The first example I put up, had all the data points (training data) fall exactly on the
line. This is not how it works really. The prediction is not going to be exactly the same
as what we fed into our model to train. Think of the example I put up about the
Friends vs Daily Minutes Online

Example

So there is some amount of error on the model vs the real data.
Donny Hurley Regression 50 / 55



Simple Linear Regression

The function will make a prediction for each observed data point.
The observation is denoted by y and the prediction is denoted by ŷ .

Here’s an idea, let’s find the line that has the smallest amount of error and that will be
the model we want!

Donny Hurley Regression 51 / 55



Training the Model
Training the model means, find the best line that minimises the error for our training
sample. This depends on the Loss function.
Measuring the difference between what the model predicts the value should be and
what the training sample actually was.
There are multiple loss functions to choose and choosing the wrong one can be like
choosing the wrong type of model.
Typical example is the mean squared error

m
1 ∑

L = (ŷi − yi )
2

2m
i=0

where m is the number of samples, ŷi is the prediction for the i-th sample and yi is the
correct answer for that sample.

Note : the 1
2m is just chosen for convenience as the Maths will look ”nicer”. Even still

minimising L without the fraction will give us the same values for w .
Donny Hurley Regression 52 / 55



Training the model

So what we want are the particular parameters (say w0 and w1 in the simplest case
we’ve seen) that give us the smallest value for L.

This is actually quite easy for the linear regression examples we’ve had so far, there’s a
known formula, or we can use some algebra.

But we want the idea to work for much more complicated models too, and with more
parameters.

The idea does work in further ML algorithms, get the parameters w0,w1,w2,. . . that
give us the smallest L, just the technique for finding the parameters might take a bit
longer in more complicated models. This is even true of deep learning (Neural
Networks).

Usually we use a method called gradient descent to solve this (later!), that does
multiple iterations to find the best parameters. When we use the .fit() methods in
scikit-learn and tensorflow this is what they do.

Donny Hurley Regression 53 / 55



Extrapolation

Extrapolation is a type of estimation, beyond the original observation range, the
value of a variable on the basis of its relationship with another variable.
Interpolation, which produces estimates between known observations
Extrapolation is subject to greater uncertainty and a higher risk of producing
meaningless results.

Donny Hurley Regression 54 / 55



Building a model

We have a set of data, that is a pair of information. We know the correct answer for
the set.

X is the set of all inputs (a matrix).

y is the set of all corresponding response variables.

A particular yi is the result for a particular xi.

from sklearn import linear_model

lr = linear_model.LinearRegression ()
lr.fit(X, y)
pred = lr.predict(X)

Donny Hurley Regression 55 / 55